[[American Politics and the US Constitution (MOC)]]
## Ratification Process
### Political Ideologies
There were many competing **political ideologies**, represented by specific groups during the Constitutional Convention that lead to the ideas behind the major compromises discussed previously. At the heart of the debates at the Constitutional Convention was the question of how powerful the national government should be. This is an enduring question, even today.

The controversy in recent years over the role the government should play in the healthcare of its citizens—whether or not the national government can mandate that its citizens acquire health insurance—demonstrates a contemporary issue based on a historical debate over the role and power of the national government. Although the United States was founded on the principle of limited government, the issues with the Articles of Confederation demonstrated that it is possible to limit the government too much, thus making it weak and ineffective.  
  
The purpose of the Constitutional Convention was to develop ways in which the powers of the national government could be increased, but there were different ideas presented for how to do so and in what ways. The two competing groups who had specific ideas for how to balance power were the Federalists and the Anti-Federalists. This lesson will review the beliefs of both groups and how their ideologies ultimately impacted the scope and power of the national government.

### Ratification Process
On September 17, 1787, the delegates to the Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia voted to approve the document they had drafted. Some did not support it, but the majority did. Before it could become law, however, the Constitution faced another hurdle. It had to be ratified by the states.  
  
Article VII, the final article of the Constitution, required that before the Constitution could become law and a new government form, the document had to be ratified by nine of the 13 states. Eleven days after the delegates at the Philadelphia convention approved it, copies of the Constitution were sent to each of the states. The states would then hold ratifying conventions to either accept or reject it.  
  
This approach to **ratification** was an unusual one. Since the authority included in the Articles of Confederation and the Confederation Congress had depended on the consent of the states, changes to the nation's government should also have been ratified by the state legislatures. Instead, by requiring state legislatures to hold ratification conventions to approve the Constitution, the framers avoided asking the legislators to approve a document that would require them to surrender some of their own power.  
  
The men attending the ratification conventions would be delegates elected by the citizens to represent their interests. They were not being asked to surrender their power; in fact, they were being asked to place limits upon the power of their state legislators, whom they may not have elected in the first place.  
   
Finally, because the new nation was to be a **republic** in which power was held by the people through their elected representatives, it was considered appropriate to leave the ultimate acceptance or rejection of the Constitution to the nation's citizens. If convention delegates, who were chosen by popular vote, approved it, then the new government could rightly claim that it ruled with the consent of the people.

The greatest obstacle when it came to ratification—as it had been at the Constitutional Convention itself—was the power of the state and federal governments. The framers of the Constitution believed that without the ability to maintain and command an army and navy, impose taxes, and force the states to comply with laws passed by Congress, the young nation would not survive for very long. But many people resisted increasing the powers of the national government at the expense of the states. Virginia's Patrick Henry, for example, feared that the newly created office of president would place too much power in the hands of one individual. He also disapproved of the federal government's new ability to tax its citizens. This right, Henry believed, should remain with the states.  
  
Other delegates, such as Edmund Randolph of Virginia, disapproved of the Constitution because it created a new federal judicial system. Their fear was that the federal courts would be too far away from where those who were tried lived. State courts were located closer to the homes of both plaintiffs and defendants, and it was believed that judges and juries in state courts could better understand the actions of those who appeared before them. In response to these fears, the federal government created federal courts in each of the states.1  
  
Perhaps the greatest source of dissatisfaction with the Constitution was that it did not guarantee protection of individual liberties. State governments had given jury trials to residents charged with violating the law and allowed their residents to possess weapons for their protection. Some had practiced religious tolerance as well.  
  
The Constitution, however, did not contain reassurances that the federal government would protect those rights. Although it provided for _habeas corpus_ and prohibited both a religious test for holding office and granting noble titles, some citizens feared the loss of their traditional rights and the violation of their liberties. This led many of the Constitution's opponents to demand a bill of rights, and they refused to ratify the Constitution without one.  
  
The lack of a bill of rights was especially a problem in Virginia, as the Virginia Declaration of Rights was the most extensive rights-granting document among the states. The promise that a bill of rights would be drafted for the Constitution persuaded delegates in many states to support ratification.2  
  
It was clear how some states would vote. Smaller states, like Delaware, favored the Constitution. Equal representation in the Senate would give them a degree of equality with the larger states, and a strong national government with an army at its command would be better able to defend them than their state militias could.  
  
Larger states, however, had significant power to lose. They did not believe they needed the federal government to defend them and disliked the idea of having to provide tax money to support the new government. Thus, from the very beginning, the supporters of the Constitution feared that New York, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, and Virginia would refuse to ratify it. That would mean all nine of the remaining states would have to, and Rhode Island, the smallest state, was unlikely to do so. It had not even sent delegates to the convention in Philadelphia. And even if it joined the other states in ratifying the document and the required nine votes were cast, the new nation would not be secure without its largest, wealthiest, and most populous states as members of the Union (OpenStax American Government, 2017).

## Ratification Campaign: Federalists vs Anti-Federalists
### Federalists:
The Federalists supported the new Constitution. They tended to be among the elite members of society—wealthy and well-educated landowners, businessmen, and former military commanders—who believed a strong government would be better for both national defense and economic growth. A national currency, which the federal government had the power to create, would ease business transactions. The ability of the federal government to regulate trade and place tariffs (fees) on imports would protect merchants from foreign competition. Furthermore, the power to collect taxes would allow the national government to fund internal improvements like roads, which would also help businessmen. Support for the Federalists was especially strong in New England.
### Anti-Federalists:
Opponents of ratification were called Anti-Federalists. Anti-Federalists feared the power of the national government and believed state legislatures, with which they had more contact, could better protect their freedoms. Although some Anti-Federalists, like Patrick Henry, were wealthy, most distrusted the elite and believed a strong federal government would favor the rich over those of "the middling sort." This was certainly the fear of Melancton Smith, a New York merchant and landowner, who believed that power should rest in the hands of small, landowning farmers of average wealth who "are more temperate, of better morals and less ambitious than the great."1 Even members of the social elite, like Henry, feared that the centralization of power would lead to the creation of a political aristocracy—which would be detrimental to state sovereignty and individual liberty.

Related to these concerns were fears that the strong central government for which the Federalists advocated would **levy** taxes on farmers and planters who lacked the ability to pay. Many also believed Congress would impose tariffs on foreign imports, making American agricultural products less welcome in Europe and in European colonies. For these reasons, Anti-Federalist ideals were strongly favored in the South.

Some Anti-Federalists also believed that the large federal republic that the Constitution would create could not work as intended. Americans had long believed that virtue was necessary in a nation where people governed themselves (i.e., the ability to put self-interest and petty concerns aside for the good of the larger community). In small republics, similarities among members of the community would naturally lead them to the same positions and make it easier for those in power to understand the needs of their neighbors. In a larger republic, one that encompassed nearly the entire Eastern Seaboard and ran west to the Appalachian Mountains, people would lack such a strong commonality of interests.

Likewise, Anti-Federalists argued, the diversity of religion tolerated by the Constitution would prevent the creation of a political community with shared values and interests. The Constitution contained no provisions for government support of churches or of religious education, and Article VI explicitly forbade the use of religious tests to determine eligibility for public office. This caused many, like Henry Abbot of North Carolina, to fear that government would be placed in the hands of "pagans . . . and Mahometans [Muslims]."

## Ratification Campaign
It is difficult to determine how many people were Federalists and how many were Anti-Federalists in 1787. The Federalists prevailed, but they may not have been in the majority. First, the Federalist position tended to win support among businessmen, large farmers, and, in the South, plantation owners. These people tended to live along the Eastern Seaboard. In 1787, most of the states were divided into voting districts in a manner that gave more votes to the eastern part of a state than to the western part.1

Thus, in some states, like Virginia and South Carolina, small farmers who may have favored the Anti-Federalist position were unable to elect as many delegates to state ratification conventions as those who lived in the East. Small settlements may also have lacked the funds to send delegates to the convention.2  
  
In all the states, educated men authored pamphlets and published essays and cartoons arguing either for or against ratification. Although many writers supported each position, it is the Federalist essays that are now best known. The arguments these authors put forth, along with guarantees that amendments would be added to protect individual liberties, helped to persuade delegates to ratification conventions in many states.

For obvious reasons, smaller, less populous states favored the Constitution and the protection of a strong federal government. Delaware and New Jersey ratified the document within a few months after it was sent to them for approval in 1787. Connecticut ratified it early in 1788. Some of the larger states, such as Pennsylvania and Massachusetts, also voted in favor of the new government. New Hampshire became the ninth state to ratify the Constitution in the summer of 1788.

Although the Constitution went into effect following ratification by New Hampshire, four states remained outside the newly formed union. Two were the wealthy, populous states of Virginia and New York.  
  
In Virginia, James Madison's active support and the intercession of George Washington, who wrote letters to the Convention, changed the minds of many. Some who had initially opposed the Constitution, such as Edmund Randolph, were persuaded that the creation of a strong union was necessary for the country's survival and changed their position. Other Virginia delegates were persuaded by the promise that a bill of rights like the Virginia Declaration of Rights would be added after the Constitution was ratified. On June 25, 1788, Virginia became the 10th state to grant its approval.

The approval of New York was the last major hurdle. Facing considerable opposition to the Constitution in that state, Alexander Hamilton, James Madison, and John Jay wrote a series of essays, beginning in 1787, arguing for a strong federal government and in support of the Constitution. Later compiled as _The Federalist_ and now known as **The Federalist Papers**, these 85 essays were originally published in newspapers in New York and other states under the name of Publius, a supporter of the Roman Republic.

The essays addressed a variety of issues that troubled citizens. For example, in _Federalist,_ no. 51, James Madison assured readers they did not need to fear that the national government would grow too powerful. The federal system, in which power was divided between the national and state governments, and the division of authority within the federal government into separate branches would prevent any one part of the government from becoming too strong. Furthermore, tyranny could not arise in a government in which "the legislature necessarily predominates." Finally, the desire of office holders in each branch of government to use the powers given to them (described as "personal motives") would encourage them to limit any attempt by the other branches to overstep their authority. According to Madison, "Ambition must be made to counteract ambition" (Madison, 1788).

Other essays responded to different criticisms made of the Constitution and argued in favor of a strong national government. In _Federalist_, no. 35, for example, Hamilton argued that people's interests could in fact be represented by individuals who were not their neighbors. To those who argued that a merchant and land-owning group of elites would come to dominate Congress, Hamilton countered that the majority of men currently sitting in New York's state senate and assembly were landowners of moderate wealth and that artisans usually chose merchants, "their natural patron[s] and friend[s]," to represent them (Hamilton, 1788). An aristocracy would not arise, and if it did, its members would have been chosen by lesser men.  
  
Similarly, Jay reminded New Yorkers in _Federalist_, no. 2 that union had been the goal of Americans since the time of the Revolution. A desire for union was natural among people of such similar ideals who "were united to each other by the strongest ties," and the government proposed by the Constitution was the best way to achieve that union (Jay, 1787).

Objections that an elite group of wealthy and educated bankers, businessmen, and large landowners would dominate the nation's politics were also addressed by Madison in _Federalist_, no. 10. Americans need not fear the power of **factions** or special interests, he argued, for the republic was too big and the interests of its people too diverse to allow the development of large, powerful political parties. Likewise, elected representatives, who were expected to "possess the most attractive merit," would protect the government from being controlled by "an unjust and interested [biased in favor of their own interests] majority."  
  
For those who worried that the president might grow too ambitious or king-like, Hamilton, in _Federalist_, no. 68, provided assurance that placing the leadership of the country in the hands of one person was not dangerous. Electors from each state would select the president. Because these individuals would be members of a "transient" group, whose only job was to choose the president and would meet separately in each state, they would be free of corruption and beyond the influence of the voters.  
  
In fact, Hamilton argued in _Federalist_, no. 70 that instead of being afraid that the president would become a tyrant, Americans should realize that it was easier to control one person than it was to control many. Furthermore, one person could also act with an "energy" that Congress did not possess. Making decisions alone, the president could decide what actions should be taken faster than could Congress, whose deliberations, because of its size, were necessarily slow. At times, the "decision, activity, secrecy, and dispatch" of the chief executive might be necessary.  
  
The arguments of the Federalists were persuasive, but whether they succeeded in changing the minds of New Yorkers is unclear. Once Virginia ratified the Constitution on June 25, 1788, New York realized that it had little choice but to do so as well. If it did not ratify the Constitution, it would be the last large state that had not joined the Union. Thus, on July 26, 1788, the majority of delegates to New York's ratification convention voted to accept the Constitution. A year later, North Carolina became the 12th state to approve. Alone and realizing it could not hope to survive on its own, Rhode Island became the last state to ratify, nearly two years after New York had done so (OpenStax American Government, 2017).

## Key Terms
- **political ideologies:** a consistent philosophy about the structure, power, and purpose of government; American political ideologies include progressive, liberal, moderate, independent, conservative, and libertarian
- **ratification:** the action of signing or otherwise officially approving a treaty, contract, or agreement, making it legally valid
- **republic:** a system of government in which political power is held by the people through their ability to elect representatives who make laws on their behalf
- **levy:** to demand payment of a tax
- **The Federalist Papers:** a series of 85 essays written and published by several of the Founding Fathers—Alexander Hamilton, James Madison, and John Jay—in 1787-88, in favor of ratifying the newly written Constitution
- **faction:** a group of like-minded people competing for the same interests; this is characteristic of interest groups, which is a group of people who gather to petition the government for their special concerns