[[American Politics and the US Constitution (MOC)]]
## The Legislative Branch
The writers of the Constitution began with the legislative branch in Article I. There was a Congress composed of the Senate and the House of Representatives, which served as the principal lawmaking body. This national legislature represented the people in the House of Representatives and the states in the Senate. Article I includes a detailed list of the powers that the new Congress would have. Many of the specific provisions were designed to provide for a functioning economy and to provide for an effective national defense. This first article also provided some limitations on what Congress could do.  
  
Laws would originate in Congress, but Congress would not have the power to carry out the laws for the country. Congress also would not be able to convict individuals of crimes. The intent was clearly to separate the legislative power from the executive and judicial powers of the new government.  
  
The Constitution did give the new Congress the right to regulate international trade and commerce between the states. The states were prohibited from interfering with international and interstate trade. State governments were still permitted, however, to manage commercial activities that happened within their boundaries. In the early days of the country, more commercial activity was local and within a state's boundaries. Today, there is little commercial activity that takes place solely within a single state, leaving the power of commerce in the hands of Congress.  
  
Only Congress would have the power to declare war on foreign countries. This provision was designed to require legislative approval for the country to become involved in international conflicts. The Senate was also required to approve treaties by a two-thirds majority. Both powers given to Congress were designed to limit the power of the president in the area of foreign policy.  
  
The Constitution also gave Congress a potential role in the selection of the president. If the Electoral College fails to provide a candidate with a majority of the votes of the electors, the House of Representatives will choose the president. The candidate must receive the support of a majority of the states, with each state having one vote. The Founding Fathers saw this provision as a potential check on the office of the presidency.

## The Judicial Branch
The Constitution provided for a Supreme Court to head the judicial branch in Article III. The writers of the Constitution could not agree on whether there should be a full range of national courts or whether the new national government would rely on the state courts to support the decisions of the Supreme Court when enforcing national laws. Since they could not agree, the Founding Fathers left it up to the new Congress to decide whether to establish lower courts. The new Congress quickly resolved the issue by establishing a full system of national courts to deal with national laws, including both criminal cases and civil issues—such as conflicts over contracts, conflicts about how laws are enforced, and similar debates.  
  
Article III, when dealing with the judiciary, was short since the Founding Fathers were so familiar with the English court systems and the colonial court systems. They did not feel the need to provide tremendous detail on how the courts would operate. Since judges would serve during their time of good behavior and would be difficult to remove, the intent was to have judges that were less likely to be influenced to make decisions for political reasons.  
  
The judicial branch was designed to be independent and separate from the other branches. The courts have the power of judicial review, which permits them to overturn laws and actions of the president that conflict with the Constitution. While the courts do deal with criminal and civil cases, judicial review is important in upholding the Constitution as the supreme law of the land.  
  
In dealing with constitutional questions, the courts have been crucial in solving disputes between the president and Congress and in resolving issues between the state governments and the new national government. The courts also have dealt with disagreements between state governments and national governments over the **interpretation** of the Constitution.

## The Executive Branch
The executive branch consists of the president, the vice president, and the **bureaucracy** (the agencies that carry out the programs of the national government). The Constitution requires that the president faithfully execute the laws of the land. The requirement that the president would faithfully execute the laws passed by Congress led to the use of the term "executive branch" for the government.       
  
Vice presidents have few constitutional duties. They become president if the current president dies. Otherwise, they are the presiding officer of the Senate and only get to vote to break a tie. When the Senate has a nearly equal number of senators from each party—as was the case in 2017—this tie-breaking role can become quite important. For example, Betsy DeVos was successfully appointed as President Trump's Secretary of Education when the vice president cast the tie-breaking vote.  
  
Article II says little about the exact powers of the president. Most of Article II deals with the Electoral College and its way of electing the president. This method of selecting the president was new and required additional explanation. Each state has a number of electors that is equal to the number of its members in the House of Representatives and its number of senators (which is two for every state).  
  
The president was made commander in chief of the armed forces of the new country. This power was much less important in 1788 than it is today. In 1788, the United States was a minor military power, and limited communications and transportation at the time meant that the president would have little direct control over the military.  
  
Today, being commander in chief gives the president a great deal of power. As chief diplomat, presidents are responsible for the foreign affairs of the country. Presidents nominate ambassadors and other officials that deal with foreign policy (although this must be approved by the Senate, which is their constitutional role related to the concept of "advise and consent"). Presidents oversee negotiating treaties that must then be approved by the Senate. The Constitution gave only a limited role to Congress in foreign policy. The president also serves as the official head of state, which often involves ceremonial functions, although this title also gives the president power to grant pardons or reduce prison terms for national crimes. Presidents can grant such pardons to anyone without limits. Neither Congress nor the courts can grant pardons or prevent the president from doing so.  
  
The Constitution also requires the president to report to Congress each year on the state of the Union, which has led to the televised State of the Union addresses made by all recent presidents. The first presidents provided written statements to Congress. It was only later that presidents began to give the address in person.

## Key Terms
- **interpretation:** to decide on or explain the meaning of something
- **bureaucracy:** the complex organization of government departments and agencies that carry out the programs and enforce the laws of the national government