[[American Politics and the US Constitution (MOC)]]
## The Federalist System
**Federalism**: an arrangement that creates two autonomous levels of government, each possessing the ability to act directly on behalf of the people w/ authority granted by the national Constitution. Five structural characteristics are common to federal systems around the world.

**First**, all federal systems establish two levels of government, w/ both levels being elected by the people and each level being assigned different functions. The national government is responsible for handling matters that affect the country as a whole, like defending the nation against foreign threats and promoting national economic prosperity. Subnational (state) governments are responsible for matters that lie within their regions.
  
A system like this requires that different levels of government cooperate. In the US' federal system, all national matters are handled by the federal government, led by the president and members of Congress. All matters at the subnational level are the responsibility of the 50 states, each headed by an elected governor and legislature. Thus, there's a separation of functions between federal and state governments.  

**Second**, a written national constitution that can't be changed w/o consent of subnational governments. In US federal system, 27 amendments added to Constitution were result of a difficult process that required approval by two-thirds of both houses of Congress and three-fourths of the states. Main advantage of this requirement is the Constitution can't be changed w/o significant support from Congress and the states. Drawback is that many national amendment initiatives—such as [[Equal Rights Amendment (ERA)]], which aims to guarantee equal rights regardless of sex—have failed because they can't get sufficient consent among members of Congress or, in the case of the ERA, the states.

**Third**, constitutions of countries w/ federal systems give legislative, judicial, and executive authority to the two levels of government in a way that guarantees each level some degree of independence from the other. Under the US Constitution, the president has executive power, Congress has legislative powers, and the federal courts (e.g., US district courts, appellate courts, and the Supreme Court) have judicial powers. In each of the 50 states, a governor has executive authority, a state legislature makes laws, and state-level courts (e.g., trial courts, intermediate appellate courts, and state supreme courts) possess judicial authority.  
  
While each level of government is somewhat independent of others, they frequently interact. The ability of federal and state governments to achieve their objectives often depends on cooperation of other levels of government. For example, the federal government's efforts to ensure homeland security are supported by law enforcement agents working at local and state levels. On the other hand, ability of states to provide their residents w/ public education and healthcare is enhanced by federal government's financial assistance.  
  
**Fourth**, national courts commonly resolve disputes between levels & departments of government. In the US, conflicts between states and the federal government are settled by federal courts, w/ the US Supreme Court being the final authority. The resolution of these disputes can preserve the independence of one level of government, as illustrated recently when the Supreme Court ruled that states can't interfere w/ the federal government's actions relating to immigration.  

In other instances, a Supreme Court ruling can harm that independence, as demonstrated in the 1940s during _United States v. Wrightwood Dairy Co_., when the Supreme Court allowed the federal government to regulate commercial activities that occurred within states, a function previously handled entirely by the states.

**Fifth**, "subnational" governments are always represented in the upper house of national legislature, allowing regional interests to influence national lawmaking. In US federal system, US Senate represents all 50 states. Each state elects two senators to ensure equal representation regardless of state population differences. Thus, federal laws are shaped in part by state interests, which senators convey to the federal policy-making process (OpenStax American Government, 2017).

## Unitary and Confederate Political Systems
To better help you understand federalism, this lesson will contrast it w/ other types of political systems. Unitary political systems have power concentrated within the central government. While these powers may be delegated to local units of government, they can be taken back at any time. The central government controls most taxation and spending.  
   
Great Britain was a unitary state at the time of the American Revolution and remains so today. Local governments only have the powers that Parliament gives them. Since the colonists rebelled against Great Britain, they did not want the same unitary form of government.

Division of power can also occur in a unitary structure or confederation. In contrast to federalism, a unitary system makes subnational governments dependent on the national government, where most authority is concentrated. Before the late 1990s, in the United Kingdom's unitary system, the national government held the most important levers of power. Since then, power and responsibilities have been gradually transferred to regional governments in Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland. Other democratic countries w/ unitary systems, such as France, Japan, and Sweden, have done the same.  
  
In a confederation, authority is decentralized, and central government's ability to act depends on consent of subnational governments. Under the Articles of Confederation (the first constitution of the US), states were sovereign and powerful while the national government was subordinate and weak. The main drawback w/ this system of government is that it maximizes regional self-rule at the expense of effective national governance.

## Federalism and the Constitution
The Constitution contains several provisions that direct the functioning of US federalism. Some define the scope of national and state power, while others restrict it. The remaining provisions shape relationships among the states and between the states and the federal government.  
  
The enumerated powers of the national legislature are found in Article I, Section 8, of the Constitution. These powers define the boundaries of the federal government’s authority. Because they did not want to duplicate the problems caused by the Articles of Confederation, the Constitution's framers granted Congress specific powers that ensured its authority over national and foreign affairs. To provide for the general welfare of the population, the federal government can tax, borrow money, regulate interstate and foreign commerce, and protect property rights. To provide for the common defense of the people, the federal government can raise and support armies and declare war. Furthermore, national integration and unity are fostered w/ the government's powers over the coining of money, naturalization, postal services, and other responsibilities.  
  
The last clause of Article I, Section 8—commonly referred to as the Elastic Clause, or the Necessary and Proper Clause—enables Congress "to make all Laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying" out its constitutional responsibilities. While the enumerated powers define the policy areas in which the national government has authority, the Elastic Clause allows the national government to fulfill those responsibilities. However, the open-ended construction of this clause has allowed the national government to expand its authority beyond what is specified in the Constitution.  
  
The powers of the state governments were never listed in the original Constitution. The consensus among the framers was that states would retain any powers not prohibited by the Constitution or given to the national government.  
  
However, when it was time to ratify the Constitution, several states requested that an amendment be added identifying the reserved powers of the states. What these Anti-Federalists sought was assurance that the national government's ability to act on behalf of the people would be restricted. The first 10 amendments (the Bill of Rights) provided this assurance w/ the 10th Amendment: "The powers not delegated to the US by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States respectively, or to the people." In fact, state constitutions had bills of rights, which the first Congress used as the source for the first 10 amendments to the Constitution.  
  
However, some of the states' reserved powers are no longer held entirely by the state. For example, since the 1940s, the federal government has also engaged in administering healthcare, safety, income security, education, and welfare to state residents. The boundary between intrastate and interstate commerce has become indefinable because of broad interpretations of the Commerce Clause. Shared and overlapping powers have become an integral part of contemporary US federalism. These concurrent powers range from taxing, borrowing, and making and enforcing laws to establishing court systems (OpenStax American Government, 2017).  
  
Article I, Sections 9 and 10, along w/ several amendments to the Constitution, define the restrictions on federal and state authorities. The most important restriction in Section 9 prevents actions that affect personal liberty. Specifically, the government can't eliminate the writ of _habeas corpus_, which allows someone in custody to petition a judge to decide whether that person's detention is legal. Also, the government can't pass a **bill of attainder**—a legislative action declaring someone guilty w/o a trial—or enact an ex post facto law, which criminalizes an act after it has already been committed. The Bill of Rights affirms and expands these restrictions, ensuring that the government can't violate personal freedoms.  
  
The states are also restricted by the Constitution. Article I, Section 10, prohibits the states from entering into treaties w/ other countries, coining money, and taxing imports and exports. Like the federal government, the states can't violate personal freedoms by eliminating the writ of _habeas corpus_, passing bills of attainder, or enacting ex post facto laws.  
  
Furthermore, the 14th Amendment, ratified in 1868, prohibits the states from denying citizens the rights to which they are entitled by the Constitution, due process of law, or the equal protection of the laws. Lastly, three civil rights amendments—the 15th, 19th, and 26th—prevent both the states and the federal government from restricting citizens' rights to vote based on race, sex, and age. This topic remains controversial because states have not always ensured equal protection.1

The Supremacy Clause in Article VI of the Constitution regulates relationships between the federal and state governments by declaring that the Constitution and federal law are the supreme law of the land. This means that if a state law conflicts w/ a federal law, the federal law prevails. The intent of the Supremacy Clause is not to subordinate the states to the federal government; rather, it says that that one body of laws unites the country. In fact, all national and state government officials are required by oath to uphold the Constitution, regardless of the offices they hold.  
  
However, enforcement is not always that simple. In the case of marijuana use, which the federal government defines to be illegal, many states and the District of Columbia have established medical marijuana laws, others have decriminalized its recreational use, and, to date, four states have completely legalized it. The federal government could act in this area if it wanted to. For example, in addition to the legalization issue, there is the question of how to treat the money from marijuana sales, which the national government considers drug money.  
  
Various constitutional provisions govern state-to-state relations. Article IV, Section 1—referred to as the Full Faith and Credit Clause, or the Comity Clause—requires the states to accept court decisions, public acts, and contracts of other states. Thus, an adoption certificate or driver's license issued in one state is valid in any other state. The movement for marriage equality has put the Full Faith and Credit Clause to the test in recent decades. Considering _Baehr v. Lewin_, a 1993 ruling in which the Hawaii Supreme Court said Hawaii’s ban on same-sex marriage was unconstitutional, several states became worried that they would be required to recognize those marriage certificates.  
  
To address this concern, Congress passed, and President Clinton signed, the Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA) in 1996. The law declared that "No state (or other political subdivision within the US) need recognize a marriage between persons of the same sex, even if the marriage was concluded or recognized in another state." The law also barred federal benefits for same-sex partners.  
  
DOMA clearly made the topic a state matter. It gave states a choice, which led many states to consider the issue of marriage equality. Many states considered legislation. The federal courts addressed the issue after _United States v. Windsor_, when the US Supreme Court struck down (voided) the part of DOMA that outlawed federal benefits. That move was followed by more than 40 federal court decisions that upheld marriage equality in certain states.   
  
In 2014, the Supreme Court decided not to hear several key case appeals from a variety of states, all of which were brought by opponents of marriage equality who had lost in the federal courts. The outcome of not hearing these cases was that federal court decisions in four states were affirmed, which brought the total number of states permitting same-sex marriage to 30.  
  
Then, in 2015, the _Obergefell v. Hodges_ case had a widespread effect when the Supreme Court clearly identified a constitutional right to marriage based on the 14th Amendment. The Privileges and Immunities Clause of Article IV asserts that states are prohibited from discriminating against out-of-state citizens by denying them guaranteed rights, such as access to courts, legal protection, property rights, and travel rights.   
  
The clause has not been interpreted to mean that there can't be any differences in the ways states treat residents and nonresidents. For example, individuals can't vote in a state in which they do not reside, tuition at state universities is higher for out-of-state residents, and in some cases, individuals who have recently become residents of a state must wait a certain amount of time to be eligible for social welfare benefits.   
  
Another constitutional provision prohibits states from establishing trade restrictions on goods produced in other states. However, a state can tax out-of-state goods sold within its borders as long as state-made goods are taxed at the same level.1

## Advantages and Disadvantages of Federalism
### Advantages of Federalism
Potential advantages of federalism:
1. One of the most obvious advantages is the ability of individual states to be creative in the ways that they deal w/ problems. When one state finds a solution that works better than others, other states will use the same solution. The national government has even copied parts of state laws when creating a national version.
2. In many ways, states are better able to adapt to local conditions and create programs that work best for their citizens. New York, Texas, and California need legislation to deal w/ urban issues, while North Dakota and Vermont do not. Farming states need much more agricultural legislation than states w/ more economic activities.
3. A third advantage of federalism is that the national government can pass a basic program that will cover the country (e.g., disability payments for individuals who are injured on the job), and states can add to the program if they decide to.
4. A fourth potential advantage is that power is divided, making it more difficult for a group to take over of the government and violate the rights of citizens or groups of citizens. There is protection against tyranny w/ divided power.
5. Finally, federalism provides the opportunity for individuals to participate more actively in the political system. An individual citizen can interact w/ both state-elected officials and national officials. Elected politicians and other officials at the state level are often easier to contact, in part because they are closer to the citizens of the state.

### Disadvantages of Federalism
Federalism, as a form of government, also has some potential disadvantages. This explains why some countries prefer an alternate form of government.
1. Federalism can be inefficient since it requires coordination and cooperation between the national government and state governments. Even when the governments are willing to cooperate, there are costs. However, when one or the other is unwilling, the inefficiencies increase.
2. There can also be difficulties when actions in one state cause problems in neighboring states (as could happen if a river is polluted upstream). Voters are less willing to pay to avoid problems when the negative consequences occur in another state.
3. Inefficiency appears in another way. All 50 states must have a department of education, a transportation department, a bureau to administer Medicaid and unemployment benefits, and many other jobs. This duplication of effort can be costly, especially in the smaller states. Unitary states can use regional offices for some of these programs.
4. Finally, in a federal system, not all US citizens are treated the same. Some have better educational opportunities. College tuition can be cheaper. Others have better highway systems or more public medical care. In addition, wealthier states can afford to provide more services to their citizens than poorer states. Since not everyone can move to another state, the inequalities among systems will persist.

## Key Terms
- **bill of attainder:** an act of a legislature, such as Congress, declaring a person guilty of a crime and punishing that person w/o a trial; the US Constitution prohibits Congress from passing any bills of attainder